Electrification
Energy system
Electricity
Electrification
Overview
Tracking
What is electrification?
Electrification means replacing technologies or processes that use fossil fuels, like internal combustion engines and gas boilers, with electrically-powered equivalents, such as electric vehicles or heat pumps. These replacements are typically more efficient, reducing energy demand, and have a growing impact on emissions as electricity generation is decarbonised.
What is its role in clean energy transitions?
Electrification is one of the most important strategies for reducing CO2 emissions from energy in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, where the majority of emissions reductions from electrification come from the shift towards electric transport and the installation of heat pumps.
What are the challenges?
To achieve the full decarbonisation benefits of electrification envisioned in the Net Zero pathway, electricity generation needs to shift to low-carbon sources such as renewables. Power grids will also need to expand their capacity and flexibility to accommodate the growing demand for electricity.
What is electrification?
Chevron down
Electrification means replacing technologies or processes that use fossil fuels, like internal combustion engines and gas boilers, with electrically-powered equivalents, such as electric vehicles or heat pumps. These replacements are typically more efficient, reducing energy demand, and have a growing impact on emissions as electricity generation is decarbonised.
What is its role in clean energy transitions?
Chevron down
Electrification is one of the most important strategies for reducing CO2 emissions from energy in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 Scenario, where the majority of emissions reductions from electrification come from the shift towards electric transport and the installation of heat pumps.
What are the challenges?
Chevron down
To achieve the full decarbonisation benefits of electrification envisioned in the Net Zero pathway, electricity generation needs to shift to low-carbon sources such as renewables. Power grids will also need to expand their capacity and flexibility to accommodate the growing demand for electricity.
Tracking Electrification
More efforts needed
With significant potential to mitigate emissions and decarbonise energy supply chains, electrification is an important strategy to reach net zero goals. As more energy end uses become electrified, the share of electricity in total final energy consumption increases in the Net Zero Emissions by 2050 (NZE) Scenario from 20% in 2022 to over 27% in 2030.
In recent years this share has been increasing steadily, but to get on track with the NZE Scenario the speed of this increase will need to double to reach the 2030 milestone. Much of the need can be met by the shift towards electric transport and the installation of heat pumps. In industry the highest potential for electrification is in low-temperature heat processes, such as food drying and beverage processes. Due to the highly competitive market and long lifetime of equipment, the electrification of industrial end uses is slower compared to other demand sectors.
Tracking Clean Energy Progress 2023
circle-arrow
Country and regional highlights
Chevron down
Electrification gains momentum across countries and sectors
Electrification gains momentum across countries and sectors
In the last year notable progress was made in these countries:
China
reached an electric vehicle (EV) sales share of 29% in 2022. As such, the government’s target of 20% new energy vehicle sales in 2025 was comfortably met 3 years ahead of time.
In
France
and the
United States
,
heat pumps outsold fossil fuel-based heating systems in 2022.
Over half of
India
’s
three-wheeler registrations in 2022 were electric.
New Zealand
banned the installation of new low- and medium-temperature coal boilers in 2021 to encourage cleaner alternatives for industries.
CO2 emissions
Chevron down
In the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario, from now to 2030 most electrification-related emission reductions occur in transport
In the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario, from now to 2030 most electrification-related emission reductions occur in transport
Electrification holds great potential to reduce final energy demand because the efficiency of electric technologies is generally much higher than fossil fuel-based alternatives with similar energy services. Furthermore, the emission reduction benefits of electrification go hand-in-hand with an increase of renewable energy. As the number of end uses increasingly shifts towards electricity, more (flexible) capacity is added to the electricity system, mitigating the effects of integrating variable renewables. Similarly, when the electricity supply becomes increasingly saturated with renewables, the carbon intensity across all sectors will drop.
The majority of electrification-related CO
2
emission reductions are in the road transport sector, specifically within the light-duty vehicle segment, with an increase in powertrain efficiency alone avoiding about 1 Gt of CO2 emissions in 2030 relative to today under the NZE Scenario. This segment benefits greatly from increasing technology deployment and legislation that targets air pollution within urban areas. The second biggest contributor is the electrification of space heating. Currently, natural gas boilers have a large share in residential heating, but new energy efficiency standards of buildings will increase the share of heat pumps. Additional reductions will occur with the increased use of renewable energy that often comes with electrification.
Energy
Chevron down
The share of electricity in energy demand will need to increase by 4% per year to get on track with the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario
The share of electricity in energy demand will need to increase by 4% per year to get on track with the Net Zero by 2050 Scenario
Share of electricity in total final energy consumption in the Net Zero Scenario, 2005-2030
Open
expand
After a strong increase in electricity demand in 2021, demand
remained resilient in 2022
amid the global energy crisis triggered by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. While electricity demand declined in Europe and growth slowed down in China, the United States and India saw a high increase in electricity demand following a relaxation of coronavirus (Covid-19) pandemic restrictions and an increase in economic activity. Demand rose by about 2%, which is just below the average growth rate seen over the period 2015-2019.
From 2016 to 2022 the share of electricity increased at a compound annual growth rate of 1.7%, with the highest increase (4.5%) seen in 2020. The current share of electricity in total final energy demand is 20%. This share grows to more than 27% by 2030 in the NZE Scenario - a compound average annual growth rate of around 4.1%. The pace at which electricity increases its share will have to accelerate to get on track with the NZE Scenario milestones.
Despite its major contribution to emission reductions, the road transport sector has the smallest share for electricity in the total energy demand in 2030 under the NZE Scenario. The share increases twenty-fold until 2030, from just under half a percent in 2022 to around 9% in 2030. As the buildings and industrial sectors already have a larger electricity share, they show a slower pace of acceleration for this indicator, with growth of 40% and 30%, respectively. However, for all sectors the average annual rate at which the share of electricity increases will need to more than double compared to the historical rate.
Technology deployment
Chevron down
New cars and new houses are the main areas for deployment of electrification technologies
New cars and new houses are the main areas for deployment of electrification technologies
The different demand sectors show a diverse range of technological deployment stages. This deployment is driven partly by emission reduction policies and by energy use cost reductions.
In the
transport sector
, more than 26 million
electric cars
were on the road in 2022, up 60% relative to 2021 and more than 5 times the stock in 2018. In the bus and heavy-duty segments electric options are slowly gaining momentum as well. More electric models are becoming available, with 220 new bus and truck models entering the market in 2022. Most heavy-duty vehicle deployment is currently happening in China, with over 80% of all sales located there, however sales in Europe and North America in this segment more than doubled in 2022 compared to 2021.
The most promising electrification technologies in the buildings and industrial sectors relate to the heating and cooling of air, water and steam. Technological options in the
buildings
sector are well-developed, and today
heat pumps
have become the most common heating technology in newly built houses. In 2022 global sales of heat pumps
grew by 11%
compared to 2021. Europe, Japan and the United States saw the highest growth in sales, with increases of 40%, 19% and 11%, respectively. However, there is still a need to boost the uptake of heat pumps in existing buildings – the need to retrofit buildings for heat pumps and consumer hesitance are reducing the uptake of this technology.
In the
industrial
sector, electrification technologies are being deployed in
lower-temperature heat segment
s such as food and beverages, the paper industry and light manufacturing, as well as for some low-temperature processes in the
chemicals industry
. Options to electrify industrial processes include electric and plasma arc furnaces and high-temperature heat pumps. Industrial heat pumps are currently
a viable option
in processes that require temperatures between 90 to 140 °C, including many steam processes, being most efficient when maintaining a temperature difference of 50 to 60 °C. Furthermore, electric arc furnaces are already commonly used in secondary steel production. In the iron and steel industry, ore electrolysis offers another electric pathway besides the conventional fossil route; pilot projects in France (
Siderwin
) and the United States (
Boston Metal
) are expected to lead to commercial plant deployment around 2030.
Hydrogen produced from electrolysis is an indirect form of electrification and is an important option for some parts of heavy industry. While costs are expected to remain higher than direct electrification, its most important use case will be high-temperature processes for which no direct electrification options are possible.
Policy
Chevron down
Policies implemented so far do not approach electrification in a comprehensive manner – further policy development is needed
Policies implemented so far do not approach electrification in a comprehensive manner – further policy development is needed
Many countries are tackling electrification from different angles, targeting either an increase in electricity demand or the share of (renewable) electricity in the total energy supply.
Policy measures related to electrification include the following:
In 2022
Sweden
published a strategy soley focusing on how to enable further electrification, including the expansion of the capacity of the grid and further developing the EV charging network and wind energy sector.
Many regions are working to strengthen their electricity networks, anticipating an increase in demand and supply in the future. For example, in 2022
Spain
budgeted EUR 7 000 million for more than 10 000 km of transmission lines. As well as the
United States
, where over USD 8 billion in loans became available for the enhancement of the transmission network. Furthermore, connecting power grids can support resilience, for example the recent linkage between
Egypt and Saudi Arabia
, due to start operations in 2024.
A number of governments are using funds or subsidy schemes to stimulate investments of electrification in heavy industry.
Finland
initiated a subsidy fund to support the electrification of heavy industries. Similarly, the
REPowerEU
plan doubled the budget available in the
Innovation Fund,
enabling a budget of EUR 1 billion for innovative electrification in industry and hydrogen.
Several governments created EV charging strategies or plans to further develop existing infrastructure, such as
Canada
,
Ireland and Israel.
To raise awareness of electrification and its possibilities, some countries have launched information and education campaigns, for example
India
and
Switzerland,
highlighting the benefits of electric vehicles or using electricity for cooking.
View all electrification policies
Policies and Measures database (PAMS)
circle-arrow
Recommendations
1
Strategically expand the capacity and flexibility of the grid
Chevron down
Given that electricity demand and supply will increase significantly in the coming years, it will be essential that the grid can handle the scale and variability of power. One way to ensure this is to develop electrification strategies that avoid overcrowding the electricity system. Governments can provide clear pathways for grid operators to allow investments to be made in a timely manner. Many targets currently exist for EV sales, heat pump installations and renewable energy capacity, and governments will need to translate these targets into concrete geographical capacity that can meet future needs.
2
Help to overcome high upfront investment costs
Chevron down
In all sectors, the cost of going electric translates into high initial investment costs. Several tools exist to overcome these barriers and to create incentives towards electric end uses. Efficiency standards in buildings and vehicles greatly contribute, as do realigning subsidies and taxes so the business case becomes more favourable.
3
Target RD&D on the electrification of industry
Chevron down
The technical potential for electrification in industry is high, but significant innovation and deployment is required to decrease the cost of alternative technologies. As the industry landscape is very diverse, the many benefits of electrification in industry may not be well-known to all industrial producers. Quantifying the benefits of electrification and adjusting industry standards for new equipment would help shift the paradigm in light industries.
Last update on 11 July 2023
Authors and contributors
Related content
All
Reports
News and commentaries
All results
circle-arrow
Global EV Outlook 2023
Flagship report   — April 2023
Credible pathways to 1.5°C
Four pillars for action in the 2020s
Report   — April 2023
Electricity Market Report 2023
Fuel report   — February 2023
Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles
A manual for policy makers
Technology report   — December 2022
Is the energy crisis really making the business case for heat pumps?
Fuel report   — December 2022
The Future of Heat Pumps
Technology report   — November 2022
The global energy crisis is driving a surge in heat pumps, bringing energy security and climate benefits
News   — 30 November 2022
Electricity Security Policy
Fuel report   — June 2022
Electricity Market Report - January 2022
Fuel report   — January 2022
The Role of Critical Minerals in Clean Energy Transitions
Flagship report   — May 2021
Secure energy transitions in the power sector
Part of Electricity Security 2021
Fuel report   — April 2021
Power Systems in Transition
Challenges and opportunities ahead for electricity security
Fuel report   — October 2020
UK and seven major companies join campaign for vehicle electrification
News   — 11 September 2018
Comparative Study on Rural Electrification Policies in Emerging Economies
Report   — March 2010
Previous slide
Next slide
Explore more
Energy system
circle-arrow
Electric Vehicles
Heat Pumps
Smart Grids
Previous slide
Next slide
The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Error
Subscribe
View sample
Explore our other newsletters
Browse
Topics
Countries & regions
Energy system
Programmes
Explore
Reports
Data & statistics
Learn
About
News and commentaries
Events
Glossary
Connect
Contact
Press
Jobs
arrow-north-east
Delegates
arrow-north-east
Follow
x (formally twitter)
facebook
linkedin
youtube
instagram
bluesky
IEA
©IEA 2025
Terms
Privacy
Back to top
Authors and contributors
Close dialog
Lead authors
Mathilde Huismans
Contributors
Fabian Voswinkel