Home
About us
Resources
News & Events
Dissemination Materials
Join our community
Get in touch
Select Page
#POWERINGTOMORROW
We test AI solutions for the energy sector
EnergyGuard is creating 5 Testing and Experimentation Facilities across Europe to help SME, startups and entrepreneurs test and validate their AI solutions so they can reach the energy market.
Join the waitlist
What can we do for you?
Validation and demonstration
SMEs, startups and entrepreneurs can test and experiment AI solutions for the energy market in real-world environments
Physical and virtual facilities
SMEs, startups and entrepreneurs have access to large-scale physical and virtual reference sites open to all developers across Europe.
Support for full integration
SMEs, startups and entrepreneurs get all resources and assistance necessary to incorporate AI solutions into existing energy market systems and infrastructure.
Mission & Vision
Making AI safe and useful for Energy
With different Testing and Experimentation Facilities (TEFs) across Europe, our mission is to build a shared space where companies and entrepreneurs can test and improve their AI solutions for the energy sector. We want to make sure these AI tools are reliable, safe, and good for the sector and the environment.
About Us
What are we doing?
Our facilities
EnergyGuard is building a European network of 5 interconnected Testing and Experimentation Facilities (TEFs) across diverse energy ecosystems, in Portugal, Spain, France, Italy and Latvia.
Meet our facilities
Our facilities
Test and validate your AI energy solutions in our facilities
Our Testing and Experimentation Facilities
Hydrogen
Use EnergyGuard’s hydrogen TEF to fine-tune your AI solution. Our TEF offers a safe, real-world setting to validate your technology in hydrogen operations
Learn more
Transmission networks
Use EnergyGuard to test your AI on real and virtual transmission networks. Our facility helps you validate and improve your solution in realistic grid conditions.
Learn more
Microgrids
Test your AI solution in real microgrid environments with EnergyGuard. Our TEF supports safe, practical experimentation to optimise microgrid operations.
Learn more
Residential buildings
Validate your AI solution in residential building environments. Our TEF provides physical and digital spaces to test how your technology supports energy efficiency.
Learn more
Renewable energy communities
Use EnergyGuard to test your AI in renewable energy communities. Our TEF lets you safely validate solutions designed to support community-based energy systems.
Learn more
The process
How does our process work?
Virtual Simulation
Using the digital twin of the energy infrastructure, we simulate real-world scenarios and test your AI solution’s performance under various conditions and analyzing the results to refine your models.
Physical Experimentation
The AI solution is deployed to relevant physical testing facilities to conduct controlled experiments under specific conditions, allowing you to gather real-world data and compare it with the simulation results.
Validation and Integration
You can analyze the data from both virtual and physical testing, using EnergyGuard’s tools and resources. You can then perform validation checks, including cybersecurity and trustworthiness assessments.
News and Events
Stay Connected with EnergyGuard
Welcome to the EnergyGuard’s news and events hub! Here, you can find the latest updates, groundbreaking research, and exciting events from our network of Testing and Experimentation Facilities (TEFs).
Explore News and Events
EnergyGuard is trying to help you take your AI solution to the energy market.
Subscribe to learn more
.
Follow us on social media
Follow
Project Coordinator
Dr. Spiros Mouzakitis
Researcher at
DSSLab, I
CCS
Contact us
Name
Email Address
How can we help you?
Send it
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme under grant agreement No.
101172705
The content of this website does not represent the opinion of the European Union, and the European Union is not responsible for any use that might be made of such content.
Privacy and Cookie Policy
Terms of Service
For Whistleblowers