Renewable Integration
Energy system
Electricity
Renewable Integration
Overview
Power system transformation
What is it? / What is variable renewable energy (VRE)?
Sources of renewable energy (usually electricity) where the maximum output of an installation at a given time depends on the availability of fluctuating environmental inputs. Includes wind energy, solar energy, run-of-river hydro and ocean energy. VRE is a preferable term as it does not convey an inaccurate impression that the output is always subject to sharp or sudden outages or changes. For example, while wind energy is variable, it may operate for long periods without output dropping to zero.
Why is this important?
Increasingly, power system planning exercises are incorporating assessments of flexibility requirements and integrating across power market segments and economic sectors. Such integrated approaches can help to uncover smart solutions, but policy makers may need to intervene to encourage these kinds of approaches in an unbundled system.
What are the challenges?
High shares of VRE can create operational challenges, particularly short-term flexibility related to power system stability on the sub-second timescale. System inertia, a property derived from synchronous generators, acts to mitigate the rate of change of frequency following a contingency event in the power system. VRE generators do not have a direct, electro-mechanical coupling to the grid, which makes them different to traditional, synchronous generators.
What is it? / What is variable renewable energy (VRE)?
Chevron down
Sources of renewable energy (usually electricity) where the maximum output of an installation at a given time depends on the availability of fluctuating environmental inputs. Includes wind energy, solar energy, run-of-river hydro and ocean energy. VRE is a preferable term as it does not convey an inaccurate impression that the output is always subject to sharp or sudden outages or changes. For example, while wind energy is variable, it may operate for long periods without output dropping to zero.
Why is this important?
Chevron down
Increasingly, power system planning exercises are incorporating assessments of flexibility requirements and integrating across power market segments and economic sectors. Such integrated approaches can help to uncover smart solutions, but policy makers may need to intervene to encourage these kinds of approaches in an unbundled system.
What are the challenges?
Chevron down
High shares of VRE can create operational challenges, particularly short-term flexibility related to power system stability on the sub-second timescale. System inertia, a property derived from synchronous generators, acts to mitigate the rate of change of frequency following a contingency event in the power system. VRE generators do not have a direct, electro-mechanical coupling to the grid, which makes them different to traditional, synchronous generators.
Latest findings
Previous slide
Next slide
Timely integration is essential for widespread uptake of solar PV and wind
Realising the full potential of expanding solar PV and wind requires proactive integration strategies. Between 2018 and 2023, solar PV and wind capacity more than doubled, while their share of electricity generation almost doubled.
Maximising the benefits from increased solar PV and wind capacity requires effective integration into power systems. While power systems have always managed demand variability, variable renewable energy (VRE) such as wind and solar PV introduces supply variability depending on the weather.
This variability will require increasing the flexibility of the entire power system, by leveraging dispatchable generation, grid enhancements, increased storage and demand response. Successful integration maximises the amount of energy that can be sourced securely and affordably, minimises costly system stability measures, and reduces dependency on fossil fuels.
Integrating Solar and Wind
circle-arrow
Countries in phases of variable renewables integration, 2023-2030
Open
expand
Six phases of system integration
The integration of VRE can be categorised into a framework made of six different phases, which can be used to prioritise different measures to support system flexibility, identify relevant challenges and implement appropriate measures to support the system integration of VRE.
Power system flexibility refers to the capability of a power system to maintain continuous service in the face of rapid and large swings in supply or demand, whatever the cause. Flexibility has always been an important requirement for power systems due to the need to plan for unexpected contingencies such as plant and transmission outages. However system flexibility has become increasingly important for policy makers as the share of VRE generation increases and needs to be addressed in all time domains from real-time operations to long-term system planning.
Phase 1 captures very early stages where VRE deployment has no immediate impact on power system operation. Phase 2 flexibility issues emerge but the system is able to cope with them through minor operational modifications. Phases 3 through 6 indicate the increasing influence of VRE in determining system operations.
Introduction to System Integration of Renewables
circle-arrow
Annual variable renewable energy share and corresponding system integration phase in selected countries/regions, 2022
Open
expand
Power system transformation
The integration of VRE can be categorised into a framework made of six different phases, which can be used to prioritise different measures to support system flexibility, identify relevant challenges and implement appropriate measures to support the system integration of VRE.
Six phases of variable renewable integration
Chevron down
The IEA’s phases of VRE integration framework outlines six phases of increasing solar PV and wind impacts on the power system. Each phase presents new challenges requiring targeted measures to enable the secure and cost-effective uptake of VRE. Phases 1 to 3, considered low phases of VRE integration, experience relatively low impacts, with most challenges addressable through straightforward modifications to existing assets or operational improvements. Phases 4 to 6 are considered high phases and mark increasing influence of VRE in shaping system operations, requiring a fundamental transformation of the power system.
The IEA’s phases of VRE integration framework outlines six phases of increasing solar PV and wind impacts on the power system. Each phase presents new challenges requiring targeted measures to enable the secure and cost-effective uptake of VRE. Phases 1 to 3, considered low phases of VRE integration, experience relatively low impacts, with most challenges addressable through straightforward modifications to existing assets or operational improvements. Phases 4 to 6 are considered high phases and mark increasing influence of VRE in shaping system operations, requiring a fundamental transformation of the power system.
Phase 1
VRE has no significant impact at the system level
The first set of VRE plants are deployed, but their impact is
largely insignificant at the system level
and the typical operating parameters of the system remain unchanged. Any effects are very
localised
, for example at the grid connection point of plants.
Load versus net load
The difference between load and net load is
minimal
Phase 2
VRE has a minor to moderate impact on the system
As more VRE plants are added, changes between load and net load become more noticeable with a minor to moderate impact on the system such as
faster and more frequent ramping of generators
. Upgrades to operating practices such as integrating forecasting into dispatch and making better use of existing system resources are usually sufficient to achieve system integration.
Load versus net load
The difference between load and net load is
noticeable
Phase 3
VRE determines the operation pattern of the power system
VRE determines the operation pattern of the power system and
increases the uncertainty and variability of net load
. Greater swings in the supply-demand balance prompt the need for a
systematic increase in flexible operation
of the power system that often goes beyond what can be readily supplied by existing assets and operational practice.
Load versus net load
The
"duck"
curve starts emerging, suggesting that more pronounced and longer ramps are required
Phase 4
VRE meets almost all demand at times
VRE output is sufficient to meet a large majority of electricity during certain periods, which may impact power system stability. A key operational challenge is related to the way the power system responds to
maintain stability immediately following disruptions
in supply or demand, which may involve advanced operational solutions and changes in regulatory approaches.
Percentage of hours covered by VRE
During a few hours of the year, almost all demand is covered by VRE
Phase 5
Significant volumes of surplus VRE across the year
Rising shares of VRE mean that without additional measures VRE availability will exceed demand during many hours and be in
overall surplus for periods of a day or more
. Achieving such shares under decarbonisation goals in an
economic and secure manner
requires increased measures to support VRE utilisation, such as large deployment of demand response, energy storage and grids, and more extensive solutions to ensure stability at low levels of conventional supply.
Percentage of hours covered by VRE
VRE generation can be higher than 100% of the local demand: surplus energy must be managed
Phase 6
Secure electricity supply almost exclusively from VRE
Phase 6 applies to regions looking to meet extremely high shares of annual electricity demand with VRE. The main challenges in this phase include
operating a system largely dependent on converter-connected resources and meeting demand during extended periods of low wind and sun availability
. Addressing flexibility needs can involve long-duration energy storage or extensive electricity trade with other regions.
Electricity generation and load profiles
Prolonged periods of low VRE availability need to be compensated for by storage and dispatchable generation
Challenges with system integration
Chevron down
The first issues that become apparent are at short to medium timescales, followed by stability concerns at ultra-short timescales. As VRE becomes a dominant source of supply in the system, long- to very long-term issues are encountered in the highest phases.
The first issues that become apparent are at short to medium timescales, followed by stability concerns at ultra-short timescales. As VRE becomes a dominant source of supply in the system, long- to very long-term issues are encountered in the highest phases.
Issues seen at different flexibility timescales
Open
expand
Issues seen at different flexibility timescales
Close dialog
Download image
Download image
Depending on the institutional aspects of the system and markets, there are four key categories of infrastructure assets that feed flexibility into the system; these include: (a) power plants (both conventional and VRE); (b) electricity network interconnections; (c) energy storage; and (d) distributed energy resources.
Conventional power plants, electricity networks and pumped storage hydropower have historically been the primary sources of flexibility. However, operational improvements in VRE power plants, electricity networks and the advent of affordable distributed energy resources and battery energy storage systems, are enabling a wider set of flexibility options for consideration.
As power systems transition towards higher phases of system integration, these flexibility resources can work together to enhance system flexibility in a cost-effective, reliable and environmental sound manner. Modifications to policy, market and regulatory frameworks ensure that battery energy storage systems and distributed energy resources can participate in the power system to provide flexibility services.
Integrating Solar and Wind
This report underscores the urgent need for timely integration of solar PV and wind capacity to achieve global decarbonisation goals, as these technologies are projected to contribute significantly to meet growing demands for electricity by 2030.
Read more
Integrating Solar and Wind
Global experience and emerging challenges
Technology report   — September 2024
Related content
All
Data
Reports
News and commentaries
All results
circle-arrow
Integrating Solar and Wind
Global experience and emerging challenges
Technology report   — September 2024
G7 ministers draw on wide range of IEA recommendations to strengthen energy security and accelerate clean energy transitions
News   — 30 April 2024
Africa GIS Catalogue for Energy Planning
A collection of geographic information systems (GIS) models and datasets essential for integrated energy planning in Africa
Data explorer
card data set
Development of Mauritania’s high-quality renewable resources could catalyse the country’s efforts to boost sustainable economic growth
News   — 22 November 2023
Breakthrough Agenda Report 2023
Report   — September 2023
Co-operation across borders is key to building interconnected power systems of the future
Commentary   — 16 August 2023
Digital tools will help keep distributed solar PV growing strongly
Commentary   — 25 July 2023
Tripling renewable power capacity by 2030 is vital to keep the 1.5°C goal within reach
Commentary   — 21 July 2023
Grid Integration of Electric Vehicles
A manual for policy makers
Technology report   — December 2022
IEA launches a roadmap for Moldova on System Integration of Renewables
News   — 15 March 2022
IEA and OECD team up to review clean energy investment climate in Indonesia
News   — 10 September 2021
Power system flexibility will be essential for India to reach its renewable energy targets
Commentary   — 27 July 2021
Thailand Power System Flexibility Study
Country report   — May 2021
IEA supports Indonesia’s plans for deploying renewable energy through knowledge-sharing sessions
News   — 19 April 2021
Electricity Security 2021
Challenges and opportunities ahead for electricity security
Flagship report   — April 2021
Secure energy transitions in the power sector
Part of Electricity Security 2021
Fuel report   — April 2021
Enhancing cyber resilience in electricity systems
Part of Electricity Security 2021
Fuel report   — April 2021
Climate Resilience
Part of Electricty Security 2021
Fuel report   — April 2021
Analytical frameworks for electricity security
Part of Electricity Security 2021
Fuel report   — April 2021
Severe power cuts in Texas highlight energy security risks related to extreme weather events
Commentary   — 18 February 2021
Southeast Asia can reach clean energy targets by investing in transmission
Commentary   — 05 February 2021
RTE and IEA publish study on the technical conditions necessary for a power system with a High Share of Renewables in France Towards 2050
Press release   — 27 January 2021
IEA and Singapore co-host Second Global Ministerial Conference on System Integration of Renewables
News   — 16 November 2020
Renewable power is defying the Covid crisis with record growth this year and next
Press release   — 10 November 2020
Close to 30 Ministers and industry leaders discuss solutions to accelerate renewables integration and power system resilience
News   — 27 October 2020
Power Systems in Transition
Challenges and opportunities ahead for electricity security
Fuel report   — October 2020
India needs a range of options to unlock the full flexibility of its power system
Commentary   — 14 August 2020
U.S. regulatory innovation to boost power system flexibility and prepare for ramp up of wind and solar
Commentary   — 10 December 2019
More of a good thing – is surplus renewable electricity an opportunity for early decarbonisation?
Commentary   — 09 October 2019
Altmaier and Birol: Renewables integration requires cooperation
News   — 01 October 2019
The who and how of power system flexibility
Commentary   — 10 July 2019
German Minister for Economic Affairs and Energy Peter Altmaier visits IEA headquarters
News   — 18 December 2018
Status of Power System Transformation 2018 - Technical Annexes
Report   — September 2018
Status of Power System Transformation 2018: Summary for Policy Makers
Report   — May 2018
IEA report highlights need for policy action to improve power system flexibility
News   — 24 May 2018
Previous slide
Next slide
Explore more
Energy system
circle-arrow
Grid-scale Storage
Smart Grids
Previous slide
Next slide
The Energy Mix
Get updates on the IEA’s latest news, analysis, data and events delivered twice monthly.
Error
Subscribe
View sample
Explore our other newsletters
Browse
Topics
Countries & regions
Energy system
Programmes
Explore
Reports
Data & statistics
Learn
About
News and commentaries
Events
Glossary
Connect
Contact
Press
Jobs
arrow-north-east
Delegates
arrow-north-east
Follow
x (formally twitter)
facebook
linkedin
youtube
instagram
bluesky
IEA
©IEA 2025
Terms
Privacy
Back to top