Search
Io
T
Search the TechTarget Network
Login
Register
RSS
Explore the Network
TechTarget Network
CIO
Security
Networking
Data Center
Data Management
Search
Io
T
Enterprise IoT
Industry and Verticals
IoT Network
IoT Platform
IoT Security
Other Content
Be a Contributor
News
Tips
Features
Webinars
2024 IT Salary Survey Results
Sponsored Sites
More
Answers
Definitions
Essential Guides
Opinions
Photo Stories
Follow:
Home
IoT industry and vertical markets
Definition
smart streetlight
Share this item with your network:
By
Sarah Lewis
Published:
Dec 13, 2019
A smart streetlight is a public lighting fixture that incorporates technology, such as cameras, light-sensing photocells and other
sensors
, to introduce
real-time monitoring
functionalities. Also referred to as
adaptive lighting
or
intelligent street lighting
, this type of lighting system is recognized as a significant step in the development of
smart cities
.
In addition to enabling cities to provide the proper amount of street light for local conditions, installing intelligent lighting will help improve citizen satisfaction regarding security and safety, while bringing municipalities significant savings in power consumption and lighting system maintenance. Plus, outdoor lighting infrastructure will serve as a backbone for a number of internet of everything (
IoE
) applications, such as monitoring weather, pollution and traffic.
As municipalities make the transition from traditional lighting to light-emitting diodes (LEDs), about 20% of this technology can be considered smart due to integration with lighting control systems, according to ABI Research. However, ABI forecasted that, by 2026, central management systems will connect to more than two-thirds of new LED streetlight installations.
How smart streetlights work
The technology behind smart streetlights can vary depending on its features and requirements, but typically, it involves a combination of cameras and sensors. When implemented on standard streetlights, these devices can detect movement that enables dynamic lighting and dimming. It also allows neighboring fixtures to communicate with each other. If a pedestrian or car is detected, all surrounding lights will brighten until movement is no longer captured.
Additional capabilities of smart streetlights may require more technology, such as image sensors, seismic sensors, sound sensors, speakers, weather and water detection sensors, and wireless transmitters.
After smart streetlights are installed, most vendors offer software that can help cities monitor and manage the technology. This software can also be used to gather any data collected by the streetlights and adjust its features, such as dimming time.
The U.S. Federal Highway Administration has published guidelines on how government agencies can implement smart streetlights.
Features of smart streetlights
While the features of smart streetlights depend on the specific technology used by city planners, examples of common functionality include the following:
dynamic lighting controls based on movement detection;
environmental and weather monitoring;
digital signage that can update as needed, such as parking regulations or accident alerts;
parking management, such as alerting officials of illegally parked vehicles or drivers of open spaces;
extended cellular and wireless communications;
traffic management through real-time data feeds that track congestion and speed; and
automatic emergency response in the event of a car crash or crime.
Benefits of smart streetlights
Implementing smart streetlight systems offers the following advantages:
reduced energy cost and usage with flexible dimming controls;
increased pedestrian satisfaction through improved safety measures;
lowered repair and maintenance costs with the monitoring software;
reduced carbon emissions and light pollution;
increased lamp life and shorter response times to outages;
improved architectural planning based on real traffic patterns and insights; and
increased revenue opportunities, such as leasing poles for digital signage or other services.
Disadvantages of smart streetlights
Despite the long-term value in upgrading lighting networks, there are a few challenges. Although smart streetlights save money over time, the initial investment is a large one. Streetlighting costs can account for more than 40% of a city's energy costs -- although converting from halogen to basic LED luminaires yields up to 80% in instant savings.
Plus, there are multiple applications and technology platforms, so choosing the right ones can be challenging. The lack of common standards across networks poses challenges as well.
Another barrier is the lack of consumer knowledge surrounding the features and benefits of smart streetlights. Lastly, implementing smart streetlights requires compliance with federal and utility regulations.
Examples of smart streetlights
Cities investing in smart streetlights are chalking up gains. While Los Angeles received a revenue boost from SmartPoles, which offer Long-Term Evolution (LTE) reception and save energy, Chicago could save $10 million a year in energy costs, thanks to a four-year initiative to replace 270,000 city lights with LEDs and intelligent controls. Additionally, cities in Spain have invested in green street lighting with the development of the wind-powered Eolgreen turbine lamppost.
In San Diego, sensor-laden smart streetlights have been installed to help direct drivers to vacant parking spaces and alert traffic enforcement officers to illegally parked cars. These intelligent fixtures can connect to systems to help determine which intersections are the most dangerous and need to be redesigned. Systems such as these could help municipalities adjust traffic signals by monitoring intersections and noting when traffic backs up, and sensors connected to the streetlights could also detect sounds such as gunfire, broken glass or a car crash.
Software developers are creating apps using the data gathered by the streetlight internet of things (IoT) network. Emerging apps include one that identifies the quietest walking route; a "digital cane" for using traffic and location data to help visually impaired people cross the street; an app that enables food truck drivers to find locations with available parking spaces and high pedestrian traffic; and an app for identifying interesting events in real time.
Continue Reading About smart streetlight
Learn how to build smart city network backbone using smart streetlights
Smart streetlights aid Oklahoma power company in keeping the lights on
Explore how IoT is used for for sustainability in these 7 use cases
How utilities and their consumers can benefit from IoT
Partnerships between cities and utility companies can unlock the power of community
Related Terms
What is a smart city?
A smart city is a municipality that uses information and communication technology to increase operational efficiency, share ...
See complete definition
What is an embedded system?
An embedded system is a combination of computer hardware and software designed for a specific function.
See complete definition
What is brain-computer interface (BCI)?
Brain-computer interface (BCI) is a device that translates signals in the brain to control some external activity.
See complete definition
Dig Deeper on IoT industry and vertical markets
What is a smart city?
By:
Gavin Wright
More than 30 million smart street lights by 2023, predicts study
By:
Joe O’Halloran
Smart streetlights build smart city network backbone
By:
Sharon Shea
Implementing IoT – overcoming barriers to commercial adoption
By:
Tim Wright
Sponsored News
Driving Digital Transformation With Flexible IT from Dell and VMware
–Dell Technologies
Improving Operational Efficiencies: 4 Success Stories in Digital Transformation
–Dell Technologies
See More
Vendor Resources
Computer Weekly – 9 August 2016: Will Rio's 4G sink or swim?
–TechTarget ComputerWeekly.com
CW Benelux ezine August 2018
–TechTarget ComputerWeekly.com
Latest TechTarget
resources
CIO
Security
Networking
Data Center
Data Management
Search
CIO
Key steps to developing a healthy risk culture
Some companies fail to communicate that risk is every employee's business. For others, top leadership is the impediment. Here are...
What is risk identification? Importance and methods
Risk identification is a crucial first step in risk management, enabling organizations to document and prepare for potential ...
13 types of business risks for companies to manage
Knowing the types of risks businesses commonly face and their applicability to your company is a first step toward effective risk...
Search
Security
News brief: Week's top breaches stem from third-party attacks
Check out the latest security news from the Informa TechTarget team.
Security risks of AI-generated code and how to manage them
Application security teams are understandably worried about how developers use GenAI and LLMs to create code. But it's not all ...
How to choose a cloud key management service
Amazon, Microsoft, Google, Oracle and cloud-agnostic vendors offer cloud key management services. Read up on what each offers and...
Search
Networking
What is a rogue DHCP server?
Rogue DHCP servers can throw DHCP infrastructures out of balance. These servers cause numerous network problems but are easy to ...
How AIOps enables next-generation networking
As networks grow more complex, management becomes more difficult. AIOps can help network administrators transition to and manage ...
BGP routing: A configuration and troubleshooting tutorial
BGP is the internet's core routing protocol, enabling communication between ISPs and large networks. This guide covers its ...
Search
Data
Center
A guide to switch from Windows to Linux
Switching from Windows to Linux can seem like a daunting task. Follow this guide to seamlessly migrate to Linux, from ...
Useful commands to check CPU info in Linux systems
You can issue commands through your Linux CLI to gather CPU information, including detailed information on cores, class, ...
AI and private cloud: 2 lessons from Dell Tech World 2025
Two key insights emerged for IT professionals around enterprise AI integration and private cloud infrastructure.
Search
Data
Management
Monte Carlo adds observability for unstructured data
With AI tools requiring large amounts of high-quality input to be accurate, the vendor is making it easier to monitor all types ...
Alation boosts agentic AI with Numbers Station acquisition
The acquisition adds capabilities such as Chat that enable users to embed agents in workflows to complement the vendor's existing...
Addition of new AI capabilities shows Starburst's growth
The open source data lakehouse vendor continues to evolve beyond being a data mesh specialist with the additions of agentic tools...
About Us
Editorial Ethics Policy
Meet The Editors
Contact Us
Photo Stories
Advertisers
Partner with Us
Media Kit
Corporate Site
Contributors
Reprints
Events
E-Products
All Rights Reserved,
Copyright 2005 - 2025
, TechTarget
Privacy Policy
Cookie Preferences
Cookie Preferences
Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information
Close